.TH GOFER 1 "13 August 1993" "" ""
." location of Gofer files - site specific
.ds RT /usr/local/gofer
.ds LB \*(RT/lib
.ds BN \*(RT/bin
.ds DC \*(RT/doc*
.SH NAME
gofer \- Gofer functional language interpreter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gofer
[ \fIoptions\fP ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Gofer
is a shell script that invokes a Gofer functional language
environment, based on Haskell. Help on the commands available
may be obtained by typing \fB:?\fP followed by the return key
within the interpreter.
.PP
The following commands are available:
.IP
.nf
.ta 2i
\fB:load \fI<filenames>\fR	load scripts from specified files
\fB:load\fP	clear all files except prelude
\fB:also \fI<filenames>\fR	read additional script files
\fB:reload\fP	repeat last load command
\fB:project \fI<filename>\fR	use project file
\fB:edit \fI<filename>\fR	edit file
\fB:edit\fP	edit last file
\fI<expr>\fP	evaluate expression
\fB:type \fI<expr>\fR	print type of expression
\fB:?\fP	display this list of commands
\fB:set \fI<options>\fR	set command line options
\fB:set\fP	help on command line options
\fB:names \fI[pat]\fR	list names currently in scope
\fB:info \fI<names>\fR	describe named objects
\fB:find \fI<name>\fR	edit file containing definition of name
\fB:!\fIcommand\fR	shell escape
\fB:cd \fIdir\fR	change directory
\fB:quit\fP	exit Gofer interpreter
.fi
.PP
Any command may be abbreviated to \fB:\fIc\fR where
\fIc\fP is the first character in the full name.
.SH OPTIONS
Help concerning the command line options may be obtained by
typing \fB:s\fP followed by the return key within the
interpreter.
.LP
Many options are toggled with \fB+\fP or \fB\-\fP to turn them one or
off respectively. The following such options are available:
.IP
.nf
.ta 0.75i
\fBs\fP	Print number of reductions/cells after eval
\fBt\fP	Print type after evaluation
\fBd\fP	Show dictionary values in output exprs
\fBf\fP	Terminate evaluation on first error
\fBg\fP	Print number of cells recovered after gc
\fBc\fP	Test conformality for pattern bindings
\fBl\fP	Literate scripts as default
\fBe\fP	Warn about errors in literate scripts
\fBi\fP	Apply fromInteger to integer literals
\fBo\fP	Optimize use of (&&) and (\|\(or\|\(or\|)
\fBu\fP	Catch ambiguously typed top-level vars
\fB\&.\fP	Print dots to show progress
\fBw\fP	Always show which files loaded
\fB1\fP	Overload singleton list notation
\fBk\fP	Show kind errors in full
.fi
.LP
Other options which may be preceded by \fB+\fP or \fB\-\fP
(making no difference) are:
.IP
.nf
.ta 0.75i
\fBh\fInum\fR	Set heap size (cannot be changed within \fIGofer\fP)
\fBp\fIstr\fR	Set prompt string to \fIstr\fP
\fBr\fIstr\fR	Set repeat last expression string to \fIstr\fP
.fi
.LP
The default settings are:
\fB+sfceow1 \-tdgliu.k \-h100000 \-p? \-r$$\fP
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables may be set in the user's
\fI.login\fP or \fI.profile\fP file:
.TP 20
.BI GOFER= file
Set the standard prelude file to be used by \fIGofer\fP.
The default file is \fI\*(LB/standard.prelude\fP.
.TP 20
.BI GOFERARGS= options
Set the default options to be used by \fIgofer\fP.
The default is none.
As an example, the following is a possibility:
\fB\-pGofer: \-rit \-s +k\fP
.TP 20
.BI VISUAL= editor
Set the editor to be used by \fIgofer\fP. The default is
\fI/usr/ucb/vi\fP.
.TP 20
.BI EDITOR= editor
As for \fBVISUAL\fP if \fBVISUAL\fP is not set.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP 30
\*(BN/Gofer
executable binary
.TP 30
\*(DC
documentation files
.TP 30
\*(LB
support files
.TP 30
\*(LB/standard.prelude
standard \fIgofer\fP prelude
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fIAn Introduction to Gofer\fP by Mark Jones.
.br
emacs(1),
mira(1),
vi(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Executable and preludes (Version 2.28, 1993): Mark Jones.
.br
Manual page: Jonathan Bowen, Oxford University, UK
\fI<Jonathan.Bowen@comlab.ox.ac.uk>\fP.
.br
Shell script: Mark Jones (modified by Jonathan Bowen).
.SH BUGS
The shell script and manual page may change without notice.

